Methods
=======

`lpy_treesim` marries biologically inspired L-systems with rule-based care
operations (tying, pruning, support placement) so you can synthesize
orchard-ready tree geometries. This page explains how the major pieces interact.

Prototype-driven L-System
-------------------------

`base_lpy.lpy` is the only grammar we execute at runtime. Rather than handcode
every rule, it reads extern variables that point to Python classes in
`examples/<TreeName>`:

``prototype_dict_path``
        Imports the shared `basicwood_prototypes` mapping. Each entry contains a
        `TreeBranch` subclass plus its `BasicWoodConfig`, which exposes stochastic
        bending, bud spacing, lengths, and colors.

``trunk_class_path``
        The entry class that seeds the axiom. All other branches sprout from the
        prototypes configured on this trunk.

``simulation_class_path`` / ``simulation_config_class_path``
        Provide training-system-specific behaviors (e.g., UFO trellis vs. Envy
        spindle). The config dataclass is serialized and handed to the runtime
        simulation via `TreeSimulationBase`.

During each derivation step the grammar delegates to your Python classes to
decide when buds break, which prototype to spawn, and how to orient each new
segment. Because everything happens inside Python, you can use NumPy, random
sampling, and heuristics tailored to your target cultivar.

Tying, pruning, and supports
---------------------------

The base simulation loop interleaves three routines:

1. **Derive**: expand the L-system string using the prototype logic.
2. **Tie**: after a configurable number of iterations (`num_iteration_tie`), the
     simulation attaches branches to the virtual support wires generated by
     `TreeSimulationBase.generate_points()`.
3. **Prune**: after `num_iteration_prune`, branches that exceed thresholds (age,
     curvature, or spacing) are removed. The decision functions live inside
     `stochastic_tree.py` and can be augmented via your prototypes.

All three phases reuse the `ColorManager` so instance labels remain stable even
after pruning removes geometry.

Batch export pipeline
---------------------

`tree_generation/make_n_trees.py` wraps the grammar in a CLI tool:

* Builds a fresh `Lsystem` object per tree and injects the extern dictionary.
* Seeds Python's RNG per tree so stochastic decisions differ while still being
    reproducible when `--rng-seed` is provided.
* Calls `sceneInterpretation` to convert the final string into a PlantGL scene.
* Writes the mesh using `tree_generation.helpers.write`, which emits ASCII PLY
    with normals and color attributes.
* Dumps `{namespace}_{tree_name}_{index:05d}_colors.json` containing the mapping
    from instance IDs to semantic roles (spur, branch, trunk, tie, etc.).

The naming scheme caps at 99,999 trees per run; start a new namespace if you
need more.

Extending the system
--------------------

To add a brand-new method (new pruning heuristic, new tie behavior), derive from
the appropriate class in `simulation_base.py` or `stochastic_tree.py` and inject
your class via the extern dictionary. Because all extern paths are strings,
`make_n_trees.py` can consume any importable module without further code
changes.

Hierarchy export and labeling
-----------------------------

The generator can export both mesh geometry and per-instance/semantic labels.
During derivation the base grammar collects color/material metadata which is
available via `ColorManager.export_mapping()`.

Outputs typically include:

- ``*.ply``: Mesh for each synthesized tree.
- ``*_metadata.json``: Mapping from instance IDs/color codes to branch names.
- ``*_hierarchy.json``: Parent-child branch hierarchy.

To force hierarchy export, set the appropriate flags in your simulation config
(e.g., `EnvySimulationConfig` or `UFOSimulationConfig`) and pass an output
directory:

.. code-block:: bash

        python -m lpy_treesim.tree_generation.make_n_trees \
                --tree_name Envy \
                --num_trees 10 \
                --output_dir ./dataset \
                --rng-seed 42

Under the hood, each branch instance in `basicwood_prototypes` carries color
and order metadata; the export step writes a hierarchy that maps branch names
to their instances and materials so downstream tooling can reconstruct the tree.
